I'm gonna go off script and make Chris
quite nervous here by making this
audience participation all right are you
with me yeah yeah all right
so what I'd like to do is have you raise
your hand if you've ever heard a
heterosexual couple having sex
it could be the neighbors hotel room
your parents sorry okay pretty much
everybody now raise your hand if the man
was making more noise than the woman I
see one guy there it doesn't count if it
was you sir all right all right so okay
his hands down and one woman
okay sitting next to a loud guy now what
does this tell us it tells us that human
beings make noise when they have sex and
it's generally the woman who makes more
noise this is known as female copulatory
vocalization to the clipboard crowd I
wasn't even going to mention this but
somebody told me that meg Ryan might be
here and she is the world's most famous
female copulatory vocalizer so I thought
gotta talk about that we'll get back to
that a little bit later let me start by
saying human beings are not descended
from apes despite what you may have
heard we are Apes we're more closely
related to the chimp and the bonobo than
the African elephant is to the Indian
elephant as Jared Diamond pointed out in
one of his early books we have we're
more closely related to chimps and
bonobos than chimps and bonobos are
related to any other primate gorillas
orangutans - what have you so we're
extremely closely related to them and as
you'll see in terms of our behavior
we've got some relationship as well so
what I'm asking today the question I
want to explore with you today is what
kind of ape are we in terms of our
sexuality now since Darwin's day there's
been what Casilla and I've called the
standard narrative of human sexual
evolution and you're all familiar with
it even if you're you haven't read this
stuff the idea is that as part of human
nature from the beginning of our speech
time men have sort of leased women's
reproductive potential by providing them
with certain goods and services
generally we're talking about meat
shelter status protection things like
that right and in exchange women have
offered fidelity or at least a promise
of fidelity now this sets men and women
up in an oppositional relationship the
war between the sexes is built right
into our DNA according to this vision
right
what Casilla and I have argued is that
no this economic relationship this
oppositional relationship is actually an
artifact of Agriculture which only arose
about ten thousand years ago at the
earliest anatomically modern human
beings have been around for about
200,000 years so we're talking about 5%
at most of our time as it as a modern
distinct species so before agriculture
before the Agricultural Revolution it's
important to understand that human
beings lived in hunter-gatherer groups
that are characterized wherever they're
found in the world by what
anthropologists call fierce
egalitarianism they they not only share
things they demand that things be shared
meat shelter protection all these things
that were supposedly being traded to
women for their sexual fidelity turns
out are shared widely among these
societies now I'm not saying that our
ancestors were noble savages and I'm not
saying modern-day hunter-gatherers are
noble savages either what I'm saying is
that this is simply the best way to
mitigate risk in a foraging context
there's really no argument about this
among anthropologists all Casilla and I
have done is extend this sharing
behavior to sexuality so we've argued
that human sexuality has essentially
evolved until agriculture as a way of
establishing and maintaining the complex
flexible social systems networks that
our ancestors were very good at and
that's why our species has survived so
well
now this makes some people uncomfortable
and so I always need to take a moment in
these talks to say listen I'm saying our
ancestors were promiscuous but I'm not
saying they were having sex with
strangers there were no strangers right
a hunter-gatherer band there are no
strangers you've known these people your
entire life so I'm saying yes there were
overlapping sexual relationships that
our ancestors probably had several
different sexual relationships going on
at any given moment in their adult lives
but I'm not saying they were having sex
with strangers I'm not saying that they
didn't love the people they were having
sex with and I'm not saying there was no
pair bonding going on I'm just saying it
wasn't sexually exclusive and those of
us who have chosen to be monogamous my
parents for example have been married
for 52 years monogamously and if it
wasn't monogamously mom and dad I don't
want to hear about it
I'm not criticizing this and I'm not
saying there's anything wrong with this
what I'm saying is that to argue that
our ancestors were sexual omnivores is
no more a criticism of monogamy than to
argue that our ancestors were dietary
omnivores is a criticism of
vegetarianism you can choose to be a
vegetarian but don't think that just
because you've made that decision bacon
suddenly stopped smelling good okay so
this is my point
no one took a minute to sink in now in
addition to being a great genius a
wonderful man a wonderful husband
wonderful father Charles Darwin was also
a world-class Victorian prude all right
he was perplexed by the sexual swellings
of certain primates including chimps and
bonobos because these sexual swellings
tend to provoke many males to mate with
the females so he couldn't understand
why on earth would the female have
developed this thing if all that are
supposed to be doing is forming their
parabens right chimps and bonobos Darwin
didn't really know this but chimps and
bonobos mate one to four times per hour
with up to a dozen males per day when
they have their sexual swellings
interestingly chimps have sexual
swellings through 40 percent roughly of
their menstrual cycle bonobos 90 percent
and humans are among the only species on
the planet where the female is available
for sex
throughout the menstrual cycle whether
she's mentoring whether she's
postmenopausal whether she's already
pregnant this is vanishingly rare among
mammals so it's a very interesting
aspect of human sexuality now Darwin
ignored the reflections of the sexual
swelling in his own day as scientists
tend to do sometimes now so what we're
talking about is sperm competition now
the average human ejaculate has about
300 million sperm cells so it's already
a competitive environment the question
is whether the sperm are competing
against other men's sperm or just their
own there's a lot to talk about on this
chart the one thing I'll call your
attention to right away is the little
musical note above the female chimp and
bonobo and human that indicates female
copulatory vocalization just look at the
numbers the average human has sex about
a thousand times per birth now if that
number seems high for some of you I
assure you it seems low for others in
the room when we share that ratio with
chimps and bonobos we don't share it
with the other three Apes the gorilla of
orangutan and the Gibbon who are more
typical of mammals having sex only about
a dozen times four
humans and bonobos are the only animals
that have sex face-to-face when both of
them are alive and you'll see that the
human chimp and bonobo all have external
testicles which in our book we we equate
to a special fridge you have in the
garage just for beer if you're the kind
of guy who has a beer fridge in the
garage you expect a party to happen at
any moment and you need to be ready
that's what the external testicles are
they keep the sperm cells cool so you
can have frequent ejaculations I'm sorry
it's true the human you'll some of you
will be happy to hear has the largest
thickest penis of any primate now this
this evidence goes way beyond Anatomy it
goes into anthropology as well
historical records are full of accounts
of people around the world who have
sexual practices that should be
impossible given what we have assumed
about human sexual evolution these women
are the most well from southwestern
China in their society everyone men and
women are completely sexually autonomous
there's no shame associated with sexual
behavior women have hundreds of partners
doesn't matter nobody cares nobody
gossips it's not an issue when the woman
becomes pregnant the child is cared for
by her her sisters and her brothers the
biological father is a non-issue on the
other side of the planet in the Amazon
we've got many tribes which practice
what anthropologists call partible
paternity these people actually believe
and they have no contact among them no
common language or anything so it's not
an idea that's spread it's an idea
that's arisen around the world they
believe that a fetus is literally made
of accumulated semen so a woman who
wants to have a child who's smart and
funny and strong make sure she has lots
of sex with a smart guy the funny guy in
the strong guy to get the essence of
each of these men into the baby and then
when the child is born she that these
different men will come forward and
acknowledge their paternity of the child
so paternity is actually sort of a team
endeavor in this society right so there
are all sorts of examples like this that
we go through in the book
now why does this matter Edward Wilson
says we need to understand that human
sexuality is first a bonding device and
only secondarily procreation I think
that's true this matters because our
evolved sexuality is in direct conflict
with many aspects of the modern world
the contradictions between what we're
told we should feel and what we actually
do feel generates a huge amount of
unnecessary suffering my hope is that a
more accurate updated understanding of
human sexuality will lead us to have
greater tolerance for ourselves for each
other
greater respect for unconventional
relationship configurations like
same-sex marriage or polyamorous unions
and that will finally put to rest the
idea that men have some innate
instinctive right to monitor and control
women's sexual behavior thank you
and we'll see that it's not only gay
people that have to come out of the
closet we all have closets we have to
come out of right and when we do come
out of those closets we'll recognize
that our fight is not with each other
our fight is with an outdated Victorian
sense of human sexuality that conflates
desire with property rights generates
shame and confusion in place of
understanding and empathy it's time we
move beyond Mars and Venus because the
truth is that men are from Africa and
women are from Africa thank you
thank you thank you so a question here
it's it's so perplexing and trying to
use arguments about evolutionary history
to turn that into what we ought to do
today someone I could give a talk and
say look at us you've got these really
sharp teeth and muscles and a brain
that's really good at throwing weapons
and if you look at lots of societies
around the world you'll see very high
rates of violence non-violence as a
choice like vegetarianism but but it's
not who you are how is that different
from the talk you gave well first of all
the evidence for high levels of violence
in prehistory is very debatable so but
that's just an example certainly you
know lots of people say to me just
because we lived a certain way in the
past doesn't mean we should live that
way now and I agree with that everyone
has to respond to the modern world but
the body does have its inherent evolved
trajectories right and so you could live
on McDonald's and milkshakes but your
body will rebel against that we have
appetites I think it was Schopenhauer
who said a person can do what they want
but not want what they want and so what
I'm arguing against is the shame that's
associated with desires it's the idea
that if you're you love your husband or
wife but you still are attracted to
other people there's something wrong
with you there's something wrong with
your marriage something wrong with your
partner I think a lot of families are
fractured by unrealistic expectations
that are based upon this false vision of
human sexuality that's what I'm trying
to get at thank you communicate your
path today thanks a lot thank you
[Music]